blog: 0.3 (#1162)
marc2332/freya: website/src/content/blog/0.3.md

        primary_color: cow_borrowed!("white"),
        placeholder_color: cow_borrowed!("rgb(210, 210, 210)"),
        highlight_color: cow_borrowed!("rgb(96, 145, 224)"),
    },
    ..BASE_THEME
};
```

### Built-in Components style
The built-in components style have been refreshed with a more modern style.

The button component now has 3 variants of 1, `Button`, `FilledButton`, and `OutlineButton`.
![Buttons variants Screenshot](/blog/0.3/buttons_variants.png)

The Scrollbar design has been refreshed, it now floats over the content with a small width unless you hover near it, then it gets bigger and gets a semi-transparent background.
![Scroll Screenshot](/blog/0.3/scroll.png)

Here there is a collection of some of the components, with a refreshed style:

![Refreshed Components Screenshot](/blog/0.3/refreshed_components.png)

### New Docs
Freya uses [docs.rs](docs.rs) more than ever, all elements, attributes and events have been documented and you can even see their docs when hovering them in your code editor.

> If you happen to see something missing or not well-explained please open an issue or even feel free to send a Pull Request.

> Also, the most important (more to come in the future) built-in components offer previews embedded in docs.rs so you can see how a component looks like before even using it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, the most important built-in components offer previews embedded in docs.rs so you can see how a component looks like before even using it. More will be added in the future.
```

Here is a docs-only gallery section with previews of them, you can also see the individual previews in their respective docs.

![Components Gallery Screenshot](/blog/0.3/components_gallery.png)

### Dioxus 0.6
Freya now uses Dioxus 0.6, nothing important here honestly!

### New components

#### AnimatedPosition

> The `AnimatedPosition` component animates its inner content position across time, any layout change that could make its content move, will then be animated. For this it needs to know the `width` and `height` in advance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `AnimatedPosition` component animates its inner content position over a set duration. Any layout change that could make its content move will then be animated. For this it needs to know the `width` and `height` in advance.
```

```rust
fn app() -> Element {
    rsx!(
        AnimatedPosition {
            width: "110",
            height: "60",
            function: Function::Quad,
            duration: Duration::from_millis(250),
            rect {
                background: "red",
                width: "60",
                height: "110"
            }
        }
    )
}
```

Here for example, clicking on "Toggle" changes the direction of the cards container, thus changing the cards position:

<video muted autoplay playsinline loop >
    <source src="/blog/0.3/animated_position_cards.webm" type="video/webm" >
</video>

Source code of the example in [GitHub](https://github.com/marc2332/freya/blob/main/examples/animated_position.rs).

Here is another example of cards that can be dragged and dropped:

<video muted autoplay playsinline loop >
    <source src="/blog/0.3/animated_position_drag.webm" type="video/webm" >
</video>

Source code of the example in [GitHub](https://github.com/marc2332/freya/blob/main/examples/drag_drop.rs).

#### GlobalAnimatedPosition

> `GlobalAnimatedPosition` is very similar to `AnimatedPosition` but it works with any content from anywhere and anywhere. It requires an extra `id` value that is guaranted to not change across time for this given element.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`GlobalAnimatedPosition` is very similar to `AnimatedPosition` but it works with any content from anywhere and anywhere. It requires an extra `id` value that should be guaranted not to change for the given element.
```

Author: just realized this `anywhere and anywhere`

                                        corner_radius: "32",
                                        color: "white",
                                        main_align: "center",
                                        cross_align: "center",
                                        label {
                                            "{cell.id:?}"
                                        }
                                    }
                                }
                            }
                        }
                    }
                }
            }
        }
    )
}
```

Complete source code of the example in [GitHub](https://github.com/marc2332/freya/blob/main/examples/grid_shuffle.rs).

#### SelectableText
New read-only component that allows selecting text to copy for example.

Simple example:

```rust
fn app() -> Element {
    rsx!(
        SelectableText {
            value: "You can select this looooooooooong text"
        }
    )
}
```

![Text Selectable Screenshot](/blog/0.3/selectable_text.png)

Source code of the example in [GitHub](https://github.com/marc2332/freya/blob/main/examples/selectable_text.rs).

#### OverflowedContent

> Animate a long content that otherwise could not be displayed, in a small container.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Animates long content, that otherwise could not be displayed, in a small container.
```

Simple example:

```rust
fn app() -> Element {
    rsx!(
        Button {
            OverflowedContent {
                width: "100",
                rect {
                    direction: "horizontal",
                    cross_align: "center",
                    label {
                        "Freya is a cross-platform GUI library for Rust"
                    }
                }
            }
        }
    )
}
```

<video muted autoplay playsinline loop >
    <source src="/blog/0.3/overflowed_content.webm" type="video/webm" >
</video>

Source code of the example in [GitHub](https://github.com/marc2332/freya/blob/main/examples/animated_overflow_content.rs).

#### ResizableContainer

> `ResizableContainer` in combination with `ResizablePanel` and `ResizablePanel` makes it possible to have panels whose size can be resized by dragging thin bars (also called handles).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ResizableContainer` in combination with `ResizablePanel` and `ResizableHandle` makes it possible to have panels whose size can be resized by dragging thin bars (also called handles).
```

                label {
                    "Hello"
                }
            }
            ResizableHandle { } // A thin bar
            ResizablePanel {
                initial_size: 50.,
                ResizableContainer { // And inside this panel we have yet another container, but this time it is horizontal
                    direction: "horizontal",
                    ResizablePanel {
                        initial_size: 35.,
                        label {
                            "World"
                        }
                    }
                    ResizableHandle { }
                    ResizablePanel {
                        initial_size: 20.,
                        min_size: 20., // Custom minimum size, default is 4
                        label {
                            "!"
                        }
                    }
                }
            }
        }
    )
}
```

<video muted autoplay playsinline loop >
    <source src="/blog/0.3/resizable_container.webm" type="video/webm" >
</video>

Source code of the example in [GitHub](https://github.com/marc2332/freya/blob/main/examples/resizable_container.rs).

#### Tooltip

> `Tooltip` is now an standalone component you can use to show some text when a given content is hovered:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Tooltip` is now a standalone component you can use to show some text when hovering over the children of the component:
```

                .function(Function::Elastic),
        ])
    });

    let sequential = animations.get();

    let rotate_a = sequential.read()[0].read();
    let rotate_b = sequential.read()[1].read();

    rsx!(
        rect {
            width: "100",
            height: "100",
            rotate: "{rotate_a}deg",
            background: "rgb(0, 119, 182)"
        },
        rect {
            width: "100",
            height: "100",
            rotate: "{rotate_b}deg",
            background: "rgb(0, 119, 182)"
        }
    )
}
```

<video muted autoplay playsinline loop >
    <source src="/blog/0.3/sequential_animation.webm" type="video/webm" >
</video>

Source code of the example in [GitHub](https://github.com/marc2332/freya/blob/main/examples/sequential_animation.rs).

### Devtools
The devtools got some quality of life improvements:

- Support for **keyboard navigation** in the nodes tree
- Persisting the **style / layout** tab when changing between nodes.
- Rendering elements **roles** before their tags if available
- Slightly better **layout preview**

![Devtools Screenshot](/blog/0.3/devtools.png)

### Accessibility

#### Keyboard navigation

> Navigating with the keyboard (`Tab` and `Tab + Shift`) should now work in more components and work better in ngeneral.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Navigating with the keyboard (`Tab` and `Tab + Shift`) should now work in more components and work better in general.
```

#### Out of the box accessibility

Previously, only elements provided with a `a11y_id` were to be marked as accessible, this has changed. 

> Now, all elements are marked as accessible out of the box, obviously tou will need to provide accessibility data via the `a11y` attributes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, all elements are marked as accessible out of the box, obviously you will need to provide accessibility data via the `a11y` attributes.
```

> Now, all elements are marked as accessible out of the box, obviously tou will need to provide accessibility data via the `a11y` attributes.

Reviewer: this line doesnt make too much sense

Author: What about now?

> This means that `a11y_id` has changed from being an `opt-in` attribute to now only being required if you want to have a reference to the element to use in combination with `use_focus`.

Reviewer: this one is confusing as well

#### New Attributes

> A massive amount of accessibility attributes have been added to Freya, they all start with a `a11y_` prefix so make it easier to identify and use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A massive amount of accessibility attributes have been added to Freya, they all start with a `a11y_` prefix to make it easier to identify and use.
```

Some of these include (existing ones were renamed too):
- `a11y_id`
- `a11y_role`
- `a11y_auto_focus`
- `a11y_expanded`
- `a11y_hidden`
- `a11y_required`

> And [lot more](https://docs.rs/freya/0.3.0-rc.5/freya/elements/rect/index.html#constants).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And a [lot more](https://docs.rs/freya/0.3.0-rc.5/freya/elements/rect/index.html#constants).
```
